Research Software Engineering Groups in Universities: The Story from the UK
===========================================================================

Authors: James Hetherington, Jonathan Cooper, Robert Haines, Simon Hettrick, 
James Spencer, Mark Stillwell, Michael Croucher, Christopher Woods

In the UK, the last few years have seen increasing adoption of the title
"Research Software Engineer", to refer to those members of the research
community who principally contribute to the research effort through the
creation of software. Originating from the Software Sustainability Institute
Collaborations workshop in 2012, this term refers to a hybrid role, ideally
combining the duties of both software engineer and researcher. The nature of
the RSE role in universities contrasts to those in national labs, which have
long offered a stable home for scientific programmers on large, sustained,
important software projects. In contrast, University-based RSE roles are
designed to support the majority of scientific software, which is in the longer
tail of research software used and developed in research groups in academic
institutions all over the world. 

Until recently, most of those engaged in research software engineering at
universities have existed as postdoctoral researchers in individual research
groups, with their job performance measured against traditional academic career
metrics (e.g., publications, grants). This is an unsatisfactory approach, as
they are then isolated and unable to learn from other scientific programmers.
More worryingly, since efforts related to software quality and dissemination do
not facilitate progression along academic career tracks, they are quickly lost
to research. This is a leading cause of the lack of sustainability and the
degradation of quality in the research code inventory[@groen2015sdp].
Individuals who devote the time and effort to consider issues of software
quality often find themselves marginalized over time, as the lack of metrics
mean that little recognition is given to their work. Concerningly, this can
mean that those best-placed to improve the quality of academic software are
often those who are pushed out of academia altogether.

In response to this problem, several UK research-intensive universities have
tried creating centralised Research Software Engineering Groups. By aggregating
demand for research software engineers across the institution, these groups are
able to provide a sustainable home for scientific programmers. Demand for the
efforts of these groups is high, with rapid growth trajectories common. A mixed
model of both free-at-the-point of use programming services offered to the
university, growth through grant funded project work, and leadership on
training researchers in reproducible computational research skills is the
typical approach. Such groups now exist at University College London,
Manchester, Southampton, Bristol and Sheffield, and more continue to emerge.

In addition to the groups at the institutions listed above, funding to
establish the Research Software Engineer role in the UK is being provided by
a new Research Software Engineering Fellowship offered by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)[@epsrc:rse-fellowships]. This offers
a prestigious research council fellowship for expert collaborative support,
rather than an independent research programme. This is a first of its kind,
and, we believe, an important contribution to the future of team-based science. 

## References
